The story so far...

In the class on September 9th about the history of psycholinguistics, we were introduced to a wide cast of characters, who have all been influential in shaping the kinds of questions that we ask in the field of psycholinguistics, and the tools we use to examine those questions. Some of the main themes involved questions regarding the relationship between thought and language, conscious and unconscious cognition, and attention. We discussed the idea of language localisation in the brain, and how this leads to ideas of distinct domains of cognitive processing (e.g. production and perception) which also map onto distinct facets of language (e.g. speech and comprehension). Also mentioned were related fields such as information theory (with its model of the transmission of information, originally conceived in realm of radio and telecommunications, but which has been used to describe human linguistic interaction as well) as well as methods such as the precise measurement of response time as a means to quantify otherwise invisible cognitive processes. Towards the end of the presentation I raced through lots of different psycholinguists; the main point here is that the field has diversified, and there are many different subfields and specialisations within the overall field of psycholinguistics.

---

On Friday Sep 11, in the Python workshop, we learned about collection variables (dictionaries, lists, sets, and tuples) and their different characteristics. We then jumped ahead to begin working with pandas data frames, although we didn't get so far. I realise now that I skipped over loops and conditionals, so we will need to catch up on those in the workshop of Friday Sep 18. Sorry about that - I wasn't fully functional that day!

---

On Monday September 14, in the lab session, we began talking about experiments and experiment design. We did an in-class experiment, in which the participants (you!) had to categorise words as either natural or man-made. This task was chosen to require you to recognise the word and access whatever semantic information you have about the meaning of that word so that you could make the natural vs. man-made choice. Before seeing the target word that you had to make a choice about, another word was briefly flashed. Sometimes this was the same word that you had make a decision about, and sometimes it was a different word. In addition, in half of the trials there was an additional delay before you were shown the word you needed to make a decision about. This experiment was modelled on Peel et al (2022). You can find the original experiment in the Literature section on Brightspace if you want to take a look. The experiment that we did was simplified and slightly modified version. Using the idea of mental chronometry (which as we saw in the class on the history of psycholinguistics has been around at least since Donders was poking people's feet under the table in the 19th century), this experiment assumes that the easier the task is, the faster you can respond, so we might predict that you will respond faster when the same word is briefly flashed before you see word clearly, and that you will be slightly slower when a different word is flashed. If the briefly flashed word takes time to seep into your visual / cognitive system, then we might expect that this priming effect will be stronger in the condition with the extra time inserted between the flashed (prime) word and the target word.

We also discussed experimental design and used directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) as a tool to understand the assumptions behind the experiment. These DAGs are an attempt to visually illustrate our (that is, the experimenters') hypotheses about the direction of causality in our experiments (that is, what we think causes what). They are also useful for sketching out potential confounding factors, and thinking about how to deal with them in our experiments. For example, in the experiment we did, word-length and word-frequency are known to impact participants' response times, so the words were chosen to be as similar as possible in terms of frequency and length. Order effects (e.g. participants speed up or slow down during the course of the experiment) were handled by counter-balancing the different conditions.

I also mentioned the difference between dependent variables (the things we measure in an experiment) and independent variables (the things we manipulate). In this experiment, the congruence of the prime and target words and the long vs. short SOA (stimulus onset asynchrony) were the independent variables. The response time (and accuracy) were the dependent variables. They are called dependent because the experimental design and hypotheses assume that they depend on the independent variables: if we change an independent variable, we expect to see an effect in the dependent variable.

We will use the data we collected to learn about cleaning data with Python: I can already see that the accuracy was not recorded properly (a bug in the experiment script which I have never fixed). Also, although I didn't mention it, the experiment was created using lab.js, which is the same tool you will use to create your online experiments, so we can also use it as an example for how that can be done.

---

In the class on Wednesday September 16th, I introduced two of the current frameworks (or paradigms) for psycholinguistic research: embodiment (aka embodied cognition or grounded cognition) and predictive coding. These are not the only frameworks: although I have not assigned a background paper on it, the connectionist paradigm is another hugely influential framework for modern psycholinguistic research, and we will read one paper that operates in this paradigm (Ramscar, 2002). Emergentism (see e.g. work by Elizabeth Bates) might be another. We will also read a paper in the grounded/embodied framework (Connell & Lynott, 2012) and one in the predictive coding framework (DeLong et al, 2005).

We looked at two papers by the philosopher Andy Clark. The paper called Language, embodiment, and the cognitive niche speaks directly to questions from the class on the history of psycholinguistics: what is the relationship between thought and language? These are questions that have been around since at least Humboldt (in the early 19th century). Sapir and Whorf were also very interested in these questions, leading them to ideas of "linguistic relativity". Later, philosophers like Fodor proposed the idea of the "language of thought" (LoT), also known as "mentalese". The LoT theory conceptualises cognition as something similar to language: it is the way the mind manipulates symbols. Similar to how languages manipulate symbols to achieve an outcome (e.g. roots and morphemes can be combined with other roots and morphemes following syntactic rules to convey an infinite number of meanings), our minds work by combining mental objects or symbols following certain rules: the result is what we commonly call "thinking" or "cognition". According to this point of view, external, natural languages (like Danish or English) are mapped onto our internal mental language: understanding what a person says is then a matter of translation from e.g. English to Mentalese. This idea fits nicely with Chomskyian ideas about Universal Grammar: for Chomsky, "language" refers to this internal language, mentalese (although I don't think he calls it that), which we can learn about by studying the syntactic rules of external, natural languages. Since all humans share the same Mentalese, according to this point of view, it doesn't really matter which language we study: all languages are just externalisations of Mentalese (aka. U.G). Note also here the similarities to Shannon and Weaver and their Information Theory.

Clark takes a different view. For Clark, language is a cognitive tool that humans can use to better understand their world. He points to the example of chimpanzees who Boysen et al (1996) report are able to make use of external symbols to abstract from the actual quantities of treats that the symbols represent and thus make a selection that is more advantageous to them. This would be an example of external symbols (which Clark sees as essentially equivalent to language) as a stepping stone to more advanced thinking. Without the symbols, the more complex thinking would not be possible. He also points to the way people will mentally rehearse something that they need to remember: using inner speech as a means to focus attention, prevent forgetting, and keep important information present in working memory. But Clark goes a step further: he suggests that we use language and other externalised symbols such as gestures as part of the process of creative problem-solving. For example (and this is my example, not Clark's), by making a hand gesture or drawing to indicate placing an idea physically in space, we can then more easily refer back to that idea later. In interactive tasks, participants have also been shown to develop a local vocabulary between them that allows them to more easily problem-solve, a further example of language existing as a tool which is external to ourselves which we can employ to help ourselves think, or to collaboratively develop ideas together with others. Thus, for Clark, language is not just an external expression of Mentalese, the Language of Thought, where the real cognition is happening. For him, in this embodied view, language itself plays an active role in the thinking process. Another good example of this might be writing a paper, or writing in a journal. I often begin writing with a vague idea of what I think I want to say, but the act of writing helps me clarify my thoughts: choosing the exact words in the precise order helps me understand what it is that I actually want to express.

Finally, Clark has one last target: the concept of the Central Executive. This is a concept from Baddely and Hitch's model of working memory. B & H's model is more complex than Sperling's which we saw in the previous class. For B & H, working memory consists of a visual component and a phonological component (and later an episodic component). Hovering over both of these, though, was the "Central Executive", the part of cognition that decides what to pay attention to. Although he doesn't really develop the idea, Clark suggests that not only is there no LoT doing the real thinking, neither is there any Central Executive managing all the different components of our minds. Instead, maybe the mind is a dynamic system of many different processes, including language, which are all simultaneously active and interacting with each other, both internally in our minds but also externally, when we use language to place thoughts out in the world, through e.g. speech or writing, and then use language again to consider and develop those same thoughts. Heady stuff indeed. Note that this article is just one expression of the broader embodied cognition framework: other authors have different approaches, but common to all of them is a desire to move beyond a conception of the mind as some sort of disembodied calculator.

In the other article, Words and the World: Predictive Coding and the Language-Perception-Cognition Interface, Clark (together with Gary Lupyan), talk about another framework for understanding cognition: the predictive coding framework. Essentially, this idea describes human (and presumably also other animals) cognition as an ongoing attempt to make predictions about the external world. Another way of describing this could be "inferential thinking". We all make lots of assumptions about what is likely to happen next based on our prior experience. The more often our predictions are confirmed, the stronger our prior beliefs become.

An embodied framework sees individuals in relationship to their environment. Lupyan and Clark suggest that predictive coding gives a framework for understanding how our internal representations (including linguistic representations) can influence our perception of the world, and the way we act on and in the world. They give the example of two different situations: navigating one's home in the dark, and driving on an unfamiliar road. In the first situation, it is better to weight prior knowledge and beliefs more heavily, because we have less information available to us from our senses. On the other hand, when driving on the unfamiliar road, we should weight the information from our senses more heavily: we don't know what is around the next bend, so it is difficult to predict it. Most of the time, we are unaware of the predictions we are making. Last week in class I took a drink from my cup and was surprised to find that it was hot coffee and not cold water. Apparently my internal prediction was that it would be cold water, but I was not actively aware of that prediction; Lupyan and Clark point out that sometimes it is the difference itself between the predicted sensory input and the actual sensory input that we become aware of the prediction at all.

Lupyan and Clark's figure 3 is an illustration of the interaction between "top-down" prediction and "bottom-up" sensory input. In the case of the Fig. 3, the central character is identical, that is, the sensory input we are receiving is identical, but the way we experience that input depends on which of two possible prediction frameworks we use: numerical or alphabetical. Although they do not mention it in the article, psycholinguistics is full of examples of top-down prediction overriding bottom-up sensation. For example, Warren (1970) removed phonemes from words, or replaced them with some other noise, and found that people did not notice: they heard the phoneme they expected, even though it was not there. You are probably also familiar with the jumbled letters posts that make the rounds on the internet, where you can read what the message says, even though the letters are all mixed up. This is similar, although in these cases we are usually aware that the letters are mixed up - but we can read them anyway.

Just like Clark questioned the idea of the "Central Executive" which directs attention, Lupyan and Clark question whether our conception of "attention" is correct. We usually think of attention as something we do to bring certain aspects of our cognition into focus (or think of Herbart and Steinthal's onstage vs. offstage from the 1800s, or Wundt's "apperception" from the end of the 1800s). Lupyan and Clark suggest that maybe what we think of as "attention" could actually be changes in the amount of weight given to deviations from expectation. If a dinosaur suddenly appeared outside Nobel Parken, this would be a massive deviation from my previously unconsidered expectation that there is no dinosaur outside Nobel Parken, and I would for sure pay attention to it. But in the same way, if someone's tone of voice or inflection is slightly different than I expect, I may pay more attention to what their intentions. At the same time, that same change in inflection might go by unperceived by me if I am currently weighting deviations from expectations differently.

Bringing language into the picture, Lupyan and Clark suggest that language is a tool that we can use to either direct the attention of others, or to direct our own attention. They say: "Words (and larger verbal constructions) become not simply ways to communicate our preexisting thoughts but highly flexible (and metabolically cheap) sources of priors throughout the neural hierarchy". Language can be a means to actively manipulate the way we (or others) weight "the relative influence of different top-down expectations and incoming sensory signals".

---